# The Metaverse in Science Fiction

Revolutionary technological advancements and influential trends don't merely appear out of nowhere; often, they are foreseen in the vivid imaginations of science fiction authors, long before they become a practical reality. Such groundbreaking visions can echo through the decades, illuminating pathways that might otherwise remain obscured. The concept of the metaverse is a perfect illustration of this phenomenon, as it was first depicted and examined in speculative fiction before becoming the focus of real-world development. These pioneering literary portrayals of the metaverse have profoundly influenced the thoughts and ambitions of the very entrepreneurs and venture capitalists who are now shaping and investing in this exciting frontier. Therefore, to fully understand what the metaverse represents, it is essential to begin with an exploration of how various science fiction authors have conceived and described it.


The term "metaverse" itself has fascinating origins, deriving from the Greek word "meta," signifying "beyond," and "verse," alluding to the universe. Therefore, etymologically speaking, the metaverse represents a realm that transcends our known physical universe. But what does this mean in practical terms? Essentially, the metaverse is envisioned as a vast, immersive, multiplayer extension of the internet, where users are transformed into custom or standardized avatars. Unlike the more static and impersonal interactions found on conventional web pages, the metaverse facilitates direct engagement with other users, businesses, and virtual applications. People are no longer confined to typing search queries into a website; instead, they are free to explore, communicate, and interact in an environment that feels as tangible and dynamic as the world outside their screens. In this way, the metaverse promises to elevate our digital experience to a level of realism and interactivity that transcends anything previously imaginable.

#### Snow Crash
The term metaverse was coined by Neal Stevenson in his popular 1992 cult classic, Snow Crash, which is easily the most important book of the metaverse genre. The importance of Snow Crash to subsequent science fiction portrayals of the metaverse and the influence its ideas still exert over Silicon Valley’s entrepreneurs and venture capitalists makes it a perfect place to begin our discussion of the genre.


Snow Crash is set in 21st century Los Angeles, some years after a worldwide economic collapse. In the wake of this economic collapse, the US government retreated to isolated enclaves and ceded most of its power and authority to private organizations, corporations and entrepreneurs. In this hyper free-market, dystopian landscape, highway companies compete to draw drivers to their roads, all mail delivery is by hired courier and mercenary armies like General Jim’s Defense System or Admiral Bob’s National Security vie for national defense contracts. Much of the world is now divided up into sovereign enclaves known as Franchise-Organized Quasi-National Entities guarded by private security and run by big business franchises like Mr. Lee’s Greater Hong Kong, NarColumbia or the Sicilian Mafia. However, in Snow Crash, the real world is not the only world that matters.


A decade before the events portrayed in Snow Crash, a group of programmers known as The Computing Machinery’s Global Multimedia Protocol group created a virtual world, known as the metaverse. The virtual world in the metaverse is a huge black sphere with a hundred meter wide road wrapping around its circumference, simply known as the Street.


While very few people used the metaverse initially, some hackers and computer programmers loved the idea and spent a lot of time testing out the software. Eventually they bought one of the first development licenses to create a small neighborhood of hackers.


The significant numbers of hackers and sophisticated computer programmers using the metaverse piqued the interest of some computer and software development companies. Some employees in the most cutting edge software and hardware businesses had friends in the hacker community using the metaverse.  A few were members of this community themselves. These programmers created initiatives to educate their companies about the potential of the metaverse and helped their companies create metaversal strategies. Eventually a few of the avant garde businesses bought development licenses along the street and designed virtual franchises to market and sell their products and services to the hackers.


Gradually, as metaverse became known as an avant garde hacker haunt it became a more and more important place to be seen, source job opportunities and network with the hackers. If you were serious about computer programming, you had to understand and use the metaverse. This led more early adopters to begin exploring the metaverse, pushing the envelope because it was cool and because the community shared a similar innovative spirit. As the number of users increased, the value proposition for businesses also increased. More companies began to formulate metaversal strategies leading them to purchase plots of land along the street and build out virtual franchises.


As life in the real world deteriorated - becoming more dangerous and travel more impractical - people began to spend more and more time in the metaverse. After all, they could meet and hang out with friends, go into the office, and explore the expanding array of shopping (with the purchased items being delivered directly to their designated address in the real world) all without leaving the comfort and safety of their own home.


This is an especially attractive proposition for famous people: “actors love to come here because in The Black Sun (an exclusive establishment on the Street owned by the original hackers), they always look as good as they do in the movies. And unlike a bar or club in reality, they can get into this place without physically having to leave their mansion, hotel suite, ski lodge, private airline cabin, or whatever. They can strut their stuff and visit with their friends without any exposure to kidnappers, paparazzi, script-flingers, assassins, ex-spouses, autograph brokers, process servers, psycho fans, marriage proposals, or gossip columnists” (pg 61). As celebrities began to spend more time in the metaverse it became cooler for the average person to do so.&#x20;


Somewhat ironically, the metaverse became a place to be seen.


The increasing number of users along with skyrocketing time and money spent in the metaverse per user prompted more businesses to create metaverse franchises, further expanding the spectrum of activities available to users. As the metaverse became more important to companies’ business models, these businesses hired sophisticated programmers to build custom software to make their virtual franchises more visually impressive and increase the ease with which customers could buy their products.&#x20;


Over the space of a decade, this positive feedback loop between users, corporate attention and investment completely transformed the metaverse. The Street became a virtual metropolis ten times the size of Manhattan, with mile high buildings and bright neon advertisements everywhere constantly bustling with businessmen, socialites and revelers all going about their business. Please note, the developmental trajectory of the metaverse is not fully explained in Snow Crash. Thus, we have taken some artistic license with the explanation. However, we feel that this scenario is extremely realistic given the available information and the way in which network effects played out in the early history of computers.


As the metaverse grew in popularity, land in the metaverse, especially in the center of downtown became extraordinarily valuable. In fact, it became exponentially more valuable than land in the real world. While this may seem counterintuitive, it is actually quite logical. In the Snow Crash universe there are six to ten billion people on earth, however, only a billion have enough money to afford a computer; perhaps a quarter of these actually bother to own a computer; less than a quarter of these own a computer powerful enough to run the Street protocol. In addition, to these 60 million core users, another 60 million or so users access the metaverse through public terminals that render them into grainy pixelated avatars. So while the real world has ten billion people and the metaverse only contains up to 120 million people.&#x20;


But this isn't the end of the story. The population of the world is spread out around the globe while the population of the metaverse is concentrated into a single giant metropolis. “That’s why the damn place is so overdeveloped. Put in a sign or a building on the Street and the hundred million richest, hippest, best-connected people on earth will see it every day of their lives” explains Hiro (pg 25).


The expansion and importance of the metaverse in the world of Snow Crash means that people essentially live dual lives. Someone can be a loser in reality and a hero in the metaverse and vice versa. Take Hiro, Snow Crash’s main character, for example. In reality, Hiro is a broke freelance hacker working a couple dead end jobs and living with a roommate in a 20 by 30 converted U-Stor-It. However, his life is very different in the metaverse. He and his friends were some of the first hackers to begin experimenting with the metaverse. He was around at the beginning. He was part of the original hacker group that pooled their money to buy the first commercial block of land in the metaverse to develop a community for hackers. Additionally Hiro - who is a little obsessed with swords - designed sword fighting algorithms that were eventually incorporated into the metaverse's basic operating dynamics.


So while Hiro is a loser in reality, in the metaverse, he has a house in an obscenely exclusive neighborhood and is “the greatest sword fighter in the world” (pg 97). Or in the metaverse at least.&#x20;


The world of Snow Crash is pretty depressing. Luckily for people like Hiro, leaving your mundane everyday existence and entering the metaverse is exceptionally easy for people with the right equipment. All Hiro needs to leave his real life and step into his metaversal one is a fiber optic connection, his computer and a pair of wrap-around goggles. His computer is equipped with a laser emitter that sweeps back and forth across his goggle’s lenses, painting the metaverse into his perception. So while Hiro is nominally sitting around in his shitty storage container, he’s not actually there at all. “He’s in a computer-generated universe that his computer is drawing onto his goggles and pumping into his earphones. In the lingo, this imaginary place is known as the Metaverse. Hiro spends a lot of time in the Metaverse. It beats the shit out of the U-Stor-It” (pg 22).


Snow Crash is a prescient book that correctly foresaw the rise of the internet, the divergence between physical and digital identity and the growing importance of cyberspace in our lives. The book is essentially a “cyberpunk exploration of then futuristic technologies [like] mobile computing, virtual reality, wireless internet, digital currency, smart phones and augmented reality headsets.” Neal Stephenson is even credited with correctly predicting and providing the inspiration for Google Earth. The remarkable accuracy of this book in predicting general technological developments and trends is even more astounding given that most of it was written before the invention of the World Wide Web which was released in March 1991 (Vanity Fair).


Snow Crash was one of the earliest books to discuss the possibility of virtual worlds and was responsible for coining the terms “metaverse” and “avatar”. Its influence on the way in which both science fiction literature, and technology have evolved has been substantial. Neal Stephenson is still seen as a futuristic visionary within many Silicon Valley circles. In fact, at least one tech company has already enlisted Stephenson’s remarkable insights in an official capacity with Magic Leap recruiting him for their Chief Futurist role in 2014 (Vanity Fair).

#### Ready Player One
After Snow Crash, the most popular and instructive depiction of the metaverse can be found in Ernest Cline’s 2011 book Ready Player One. Ready Player One takes place in a dystopian 2045 America in which growing environmental damage along with power and energy shortages have caused a global economic collapse. As gas became too expensive and scarce to make personal cars or mobile homes feasible and space in cities began to fill up, an enterprising developer came up with the idea for the Stacks. The Stacks are basically, enormous rickety towers of mobile homes stacked on top of each other to minimize the amount of space used. The idea quickly gained popularity with Stacks mushrooming across the country and creating a new type of suburban ghetto. Wade Watts, the book’s protagonist, grows up in one such stack - except he doesn't, not really.


While the real world circumstances of the book’s protagonists are extremely bleak they have an alternate reality - the Oasis. The Oasis (Ontologically Anthropocentric Sensory Immersive Simulation) is a massive multiplayer online simulation game designed and created by James Haliday and Ogden Morrow of Gregarious Simulation Systems (GSS). GSS started out as an ordinary video game maker that published a series of wildly popular games designed by the obsessive mind of James Haliday. However, at the peak of their video game success, the company stopped releasing new games. While the company’s finances deteriorated, rumors began to circulate that the two co-founders were working on something big.


After years of secretive development GSS finally introduced the OASIS to the public. The Oasis immediately proved immensely successful and quickly evolved into a networked virtual reality world where the majority of humanity lives most of their daily lives. This ubiquity quickly turned the OASIS into the most valuable product in history and GSS into the world’s most valuable company. As Wade Watts explains:


“This is the Oasis. It’s a place where the limits of reality are your own imagination. You can do anything, go anywhere. Like the Vacation Planet. Surf a 50-foot monster wave in Hawaii, you can ski down the Pyramids, you can climb Mount Everest with Batman. Check out this place. It's a casino the size of a planet! You can lose your money there, you can get married, you can get divorced, you can...you can go in there. People come to the Oasis for all the things they can do, but they stay because of all the things they can be: tall, beautiful, scary, a different sex, a different species, live action, cartoon, it's all your call. Yeah, that's me...well, that's my avatar, at least until I feel like changing it. Except for eating, sleeping and bathroom breaks, whatever people want to do, they do it in the Oasis. And since everyone is here, this is where we meet each other. This is where we make friends.”


Getting into the OASIS is extremely easy.


Users interact with the Oasis through an OASIS system kit which includes a VR Headset, a pair of haptic gloves (so players can feel objects they touch), an OASIS consol (which actually runs the game), a facial scanner (which allows them to log in and maps their real facial expressions onto their avatar), and often a omni-directional treadmill (so users can move around inside the OASIS). While many of these interfaces can be purchased directly from Gregarious Games, a number of 3rd party hardware providers like Innovative Online Industries (IOI) have sprung up to sell OASIS kits and other customizations to users. Some users take the immersiveness of virtual reality so seriously that they even purchase “smell towers” to allow them to experience smells in the OASIS.


The universe of the Oasis is split into 27 sectors each 10 light hours across, arranged like a Rubiks Cube and containing hundreds of planets with new planets constantly being added. Each sector has a number of different zones that can come in any shape and size. These zones enforce various restrictions on the type of play permitted within that region of the metaverse. These zones can allow or prevent magic, technology, PvP combat, teleporting, communications, and much more. The universe of the OASIS is also populated with NPCs (non-player characters) that the players can interact with and which sometimes drop experience or items when killed. Players can also go on quests of varying levels of difficulty which grant users experience, credits or sometimes magic items or artifacts for successfully completing them. Additionally, GSS licensed the IP of popular science fiction and Fantasy universes like Star Wars, Lord of the Rings, Star Trek and World of Warcraft before launching the OASIS, allowing them to include entire worlds and quests built around that content.


One of the reasons that the OASIS became so popular so quickly is that basic interaction with the OASIS is easy, cheap and provides enormous benefits. Haliday and Morrow wanted to make their game as ubiquitous as possible so they set the price of obtaining and booting up the game at 25 cents - a price so cheap that practically all of humanity could afford it. This allowed Gregarious Simulation Systems to reach a previously unprecedented market penetration.


However, 25 cents per user does not generate much revenue, certainly not enough to finance the enormous server farms and armies of computer programmers needed to maintain and improve the OASIS. As such, Gregarious Games generates most of its revenue through the sale of in-game assets, along with teleportation and “fuel” fares for users wanting to travel between worlds and zones in the game. This cost structure allowed everyone in the world to interact with the game while also enabling Gregarious Games to profit from wealthier users wanting to interact more deeply and move quickly within the game.


The profits from wealthier users in-game purchases and teleportation fares allowed the OASIS’s creators to roll out a number of socially and culturally beneficial initiatives for free. They developed the Ludas public school system which provides free education to hundreds of millions of users funded by a multi billion dollar donation from Haliday. They also created the OASIS public library “where even a penniless kid like me had access to every book ever written, every song ever recorded, and every movie, television show, videogame, and piece of artwork ever created. The collected knowledge, art, and amusements of all human civilization were there, waiting for me” (pg 16). In other words, essentially the sum total of human knowledge and artistic creation can all be accessed for free through the simulated reality of the OASIS.
These initiatives ingrained the OASIS into the fabric of life in the Ready Player One universe. Parents use the OASIS as a babysitter while they work. Kids go to school in the OASIS. All knowledge and an incredible diversity of games can be accessed through the OASIS at a time of cataclysmic species decline in which existence in the real world can be quite traumatic, turning the OASIS from just a game into a public necessity.


While these books are obviously works of science fiction, science fiction often precedes - and to some extent shapes - science fact. Ernest Cline, and especially, Neal Stephenson have spent decades envisioning what a future metaverse might look like and how the evolution and development of the metaverse would affect our society. Although the futures portrayed in these books are quite dystopian, this is because dystopian futures often make for better science fiction books. It does not indicate that a metaversal future will be necessarily or even probably dystopian. In fact, properly directed and guided the development and evolution of the metaverse has the potential to be a powerful force for positive economic and social development as well as individual freedom and opportunity for reasons we will explore in a later section.


The depiction of metaverses and virtual reality more generally has had a powerful effect on the virtual reality, augmented reality and metaverse landscape today. Entrepreneurs, computer programmers and venture capitalists often grew up reading cyberpunk books like Snow Crash. Consequently, the way technology is described likely shaped the trajectory of technological development in our economy. This makes these books an important resource in understanding the basic characteristics of a metaverse.


Now that we have examined the fictional roots of the idea of the metaverse, let’s take a look at how the people working to build the metaverse would describe it.&#x20;

