# What is a Metaverse?
Sometimes, scientific terms like AI, inflection point, big data, and the metaverse are used so much that they lose clear meaning. This can make understanding them, especially something as complex and undefined as the metaverse, really challenging. Since a fully developed metaverse doesn't exist yet, defining what it is can be tricky.


So, before we dive into what we think the metaverse is, we'll start by explaining what it's not. This approach will help clear away some of the confusion and give us a solid foundation for understanding this exciting concept.

#### What isn’t a metaverse?
Many people and even some industry experts believe that VR, virtual spaces or multi-player games make a metaverse. This is not the case for a number of reasons which we will explain below.


A metaverse is not a game-based virtual world like Call of Duty or Fortnite. For decades we have been able to create game-based virtual worlds populated by a mix of real human players and artificial non-player characters (NPCs). Some examples of this game type are Call of Duty, Fortnite, Halo and Grand Theft Auto. However, these games are not metaverses for three primary reasons.


First, they are not populated by thousands or millions of users. Such massively multiplayer game modes are beyond the capabilities of current games. Where multiplayer options exist they are limited to a few dozen - or in Fortnite’s case up to 100 - players to limit the strain on the game’s graphics and computer hardware. Millions of people can play these games simultaneously, but they will be sharded into ‘parallel universes’ within the game. Each group of players playing in an identical but separate world or map. As such, players can only interact with the other players in their specific incarnation of the game and not any user playing Call of Duty at that specific time. In contrast, a true metaverse would enable all of the millions of users to simultaneously and concurrently access the same game world and interact with each other.


Second, and interrelatedly, the world is not persistent. While the digital worlds of Call of Duty or Fortnite may be altered over the course of a game - bullets can make holes in walls, trees can be cut down, and structures built - these changes only affect the local iteration of the game. When the round is finished, the game world resets to its default layout, erasing any changes that have been made to the environment during that round of game play. In contrast, a true metaverse would be persistent, in the sense that the game would never pause or reset but rather continue even as specific users logged off or logged on, and malleable in that changes made by users to the environment and buildings in a metaverse would persist.


Third and finally, the games listed above do not have fully functioning economies. While you can occasionally buy in-game items that can be used in individual iterations of the games, like the weapons you can buy in some Call of Duty Zombie game modes, you do not own these items and they do not last beyond the expiration of game play. Similarly, while you can buy more general weapons and skins that can be used across matches within a single game, players do not actually own these items. The game maker does. Thus players cannot sell their assets. If players are banned for any reason, they will lose their virtual assets.


In contrast, a true metaverse would have a robust and deeply ingrained economy with the ability to process anything from microtransactions to multibillion dollar land deals. Similarly, one would expect a true metaverse to have extremely strong property rights as it would be impossible to persuade real world brands and businesses to invest the capital and effort in building out metaversal franchises into a specific metaverse if they lacked absolute ownership. In fact, we should expect a true metaverse to have a better economy with less friction and a more robust judiciary system than the real world as these factors will be key differentiators in the fierce competition that will be waged between various prospective metaverses over a finite pool of users, development capital and company investments. If competition among metaverses hinges around frictionless economic transactions and robust property rights the metaverses that gain widespread adoption should have seamless economies and inviolate property rights.


A metaverse is also not a shared space accessed by virtual reality. Virtual reality is merely one method of experiencing a virtual world or space and virtual reality is not in and of itself sufficient to make a virtual space into a metaverse. In order for a virtual space accessible through VR to be a metaverse it would have to also be persistent, live, synchronous, and have a fully functioning economy.


VR is an extremely promising and synergistic technology that is likely to be intimately tied into the value and future of the metaverse in 5 to 10 years. However, It is not strictly necessary to create a metaverse and is unlikely to be the primary method of accessing the first iterations of the metaverse. This is because while VR technology is advancing rapidly, its market penetration is still too low and the hardware is too bulky and cumbersome to be a primary method of interfacing with the metaverse. Early iterations of the metaverse like Sandbox, Decentraland, Portals, and Yakuverse are more likely to be accessible through internet browsers to broaden their reach and simplify the process of building them (building a virtual reality for a desktop quality is likely to be much easier than a 3D virtual world accessible by virtual reality googles).


In fact the metaverse will be, by definition, platform agnostic and therefore capable of being accessed through mobile devices, web browsers, augmented reality and eventually virtual reality. It is a shared virtual world inhabited by millions of users, irrespective of how that world is accessed.


Now that we have briefly outlined what a metaverse is not, let us set out what we believe are the basic characteristics of the metaverse.

#### Characteristics of a Metaverse:
While there is substantial disagreement among experts regarding what traits a virtual experience must possess in order to be a true metaverse, there is some underlying common ground. Rather than attempting to come up with a specific definition of the metaverse, we will focus on the most basic characteristics. Despite the disagreement, we believe there is a general consensus that a true metaverse must possess 4 key characteristics.


First, a metaverse must be synchronous and live. Although people will be able to use the metaverse to access prescheduled and self-contained events like concerts, movie viewings or sporting events, the vast majority of interactions and game-play in the metaverse will be a living experience that exists continuously for everyone and in real-time, just as the living experience in “reality” does.


Second, a metaverse must be persistent. The metaverse will be a continuous game or virtual reality that never “pauses,” “resets,” or “ends.” Progress in the metaverse cannot be saved and then reloaded if a user dies.


Third, a metaverse must be available individually and concurrently. Everyone must eventually be able to access the metaverse and take part in its experiences. They will have the agency to take part in specific events and activities by themselves or with other users from all over the globe.


Fourth, a metaverse must possess a fully functioning economy. Individuals and businesses have to be able to create, own, invest in, sell and be compensated for a vast array of goods and services that produce value for other users. These investments and businesses must be protected by transparent and robust property rights in order to distribute economic returns fairly (based on contribution and investment) and incentivize companies and people to invest and build in the metaverse.


In addition to these four integral attributes or components of a metaverse, there are a number of others that are more hotly debated. We believe that these are not fundamental features of a metaverse, but desirable attributes that significantly increase the likelihood of success and the economic value of a prospective metaverse. I will briefly describe three of the most important attributes within this category.


First, the metaverse should be an experience. The metaverse - and the goods and services provided through it - should span both digital and physical worlds, private and public networks/experiences, as well as open and closed platforms. Much of the value created by a metaverse will depend on its seamless integration into daily economic and social life. Therefore, competition among aspiring metaverses should result in open and deeply integrated metaverses successfully gaining critical mass.


Second, the metaverse should be built by and offer the goods and services of a wide range of contributors. The metaverse should be filled with content and experiences developed and run by many contributors. Some of these contributors should be self-employed, others should claim membership in decentralized organizations like DAOs, while others work for traditional businesses. Decentralization offers two significant competitive benefits to a metaverse. First, it expands the scope of people who can contribute to and derive value from building in a metaverse, accelerating development. Second, by attracting more disparate contributors and enabling all sorts of organizations to get involved, metaverses can maximize the amount of creativity they embody. Consequently, decentralized metaverses are likely to be more interesting and dynamic than centralized ones.


Third, the metaverse or ecosystem of metaverses should offer and enable unprecedented interoperability. A holistic metaverse must be able to offer remarkable data, digital item/assets, content and other interoperability between each of the experiences. For example, a Tesla car developed for Fortnite (or even Tesla’s website) should be able to be transported into Roblox’s universe. This would be significantly different than today’s digital world which operates in corporate siloes, “as if it were a shopping mall, with each store having its own money, unique ID cards, proprietary units of measurement for items like shoes or calories, and various dress rules, among other things.” Interoperability increases the attractiveness of a metaverse to the user and serves as a valuable point of differentiation to closed metaverses. As such, in the competition among metaverses, it is highly likely that the few winners will be maximally interoperable.


While some level of interoperability among different metaverses and digital experiences is absolutely crucial, in the beginning interoperability can be achieved either through true virtual asset interoperability or free-market mechanisms. Integrating NFT and cryptocurrencies means that users can always sell their assets and buy new ones in a different ecosystem.&#x20;


This brings us to the role of web3 and blockchain technology in providing the foundations for a valuable metaverse.

